Add Y2038 design (#102835)
dotnet/runtime: docs/design/y2038.md

# Y2038 support in .NET 9 Linux arm32

> In .NET 9, we addressed the Y2038 problem for Linux arm32. @mattheweshleman [noticed](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/96460) the issue early in the release cycle, and we also [hit](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/101444) this when our Linux arm32 builds started hitting OpenSSL-related errors on Ubuntu 24.04, the first Ubuntu version to enable 64-bit `time_t` by default for Linux arm32. This document describes our approach to Y2038 support.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In .NET 9, we addressed the Y2038 problem for Linux arm32. @mattheweshleman [noticed](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/96460) the issue early in the release cycle, and we also [hit](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/101444) this when our Linux arm32 builds started hitting OpenSSL-related errors on Ubuntu 24.04, the first Ubuntu version to [enable 64-bit `time_t` by default for Linux arm32](https://discourse.ubuntu.com/t/ubuntu-24-04-lts-noble-numbat-release-notes/39890#year-2038-support-for-the-armhf-architecture-5). This document describes our approach to Y2038 support.
```

### Summary

> Our default posture for latest .NET to align with the latest Linux distribution first, and then work backwards to determine a reasonable compatibility story for older distributions, so .NET 9 Linux arm32 requires glibc 2.35 and uses 64-bit `time_t` by default. This works on systems with 32-bit `time_t` as long as we don't need to represent times larger than 32 bits. We detect whether OpenSSL uses 32-bit `time_t`, and fail predictably if the time being represented on the .NET side does not fit in 32 bits.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Our default posture for latest .NET is to align with the latest Linux distribution first, and then work backwards to determine a reasonable compatibility story for older distributions, so .NET 9 Linux arm32 requires glibc 2.35 and uses 64-bit `time_t` by default. This works on systems with 32-bit `time_t` as long as we don't need to represent times larger than 32 bits. We detect whether OpenSSL uses 32-bit `time_t`, and fail predictably if the time being represented on the .NET side does not fit in 32 bits.
```

> Our default posture for latest .NET is to align with the latest Linux distribution first, and then work backwards to determine a reasonable compatibility story for older distributions, so .NET 9 Linux arm32 requires glibc 2.35 and uses 64-bit `time_t` by default. This works on systems with 32-bit `time_t` as long as we don't need to represent times larger than 32 bits. We detect whether OpenSSL uses 32-bit `time_t`, and fail predictably if the time being represented on the .NET side does not fit in 32 bits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our default posture for new .NET versions is to align with the latest Linux distribution first, and then work backwards to determine a reasonable compatibility story for older distributions. For .NET 9 Linux arm32 build require glibc 2.35 and use 64-bit `time_t` by default. We've made this change to align with the Ubuntu 24.04. This change works on systems with 32-bit `time_t` but cannot represent times larger than 32 bits. We detect whether OpenSSL uses 32-bit `time_t` and fail predictably if the time being represented on the .NET side does not fit in 32 bits.
```

Normally, ABI breeaks like this are not a problem for the Linux ecosystem because distributions rebuild all packages using the new ABI. However, the Microsoft distribution of .NET is somewhat unique in that it provides one set of binaries that are compatible with a broad range of distros (as long as the architecture and libc flavor match). This is similar to Python's [manylinux](https://github.com/pypa/manylinux) wheels.

[Ubuntu](https://discourse.ubuntu.com/t/ubuntu-24-04-lts-noble-numbat-release-notes/39890#year-2038-support-for-the-armhf-architecture-5) made this change in 24.04, and [Debian](https://wiki.debian.org/ReleaseGoals/64bit-time) 13 is planned to be the first Debian release with 64-bit time.

[musl](https://musl.libc.org/time64.html) version 1.2.0 got 64-bit time_t support, which was adopted in [Alpine](https://wiki.alpinelinux.org/wiki/Release_Notes_for_Alpine_3.13.0) 3.13.

### .NET builds

> .NET official builds are produced by building the product on a dedicated set of build images. The images run Azure Linux 3.0 with an up-to-date cross-compilation toolchain, and also include a root filesystem of an old Linux distribution that provides an old version of glibc (or musl libc), which determines the libc compatibility of our builds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.NET official builds are produced by building the product on a [dedicated set of build images](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/docs/workflow/building/coreclr/linux-instructions.md). The images run Azure Linux 3.0 with an up-to-date cross-compilation toolchain, and also include a root filesystem of an old Linux distribution that provides an old version of glibc (or musl libc), which determines the libc compatibility of our builds.
```

> In .NET 8, we [support](https://github.com/dotnet/core/blob/main/release-notes/8.0/supported-os.md#libc-compatibility) glibc 2.23 andc musl 1.2.2, by building the product with a root filesystem from Ubuntu 16.04 and Alpine 3.13, respectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In .NET 8, we [support](https://github.com/dotnet/core/blob/main/release-notes/8.0/supported-os.md#libc-compatibility) glibc 2.23 and musl 1.2.2, by building the product with a root filesystem from Ubuntu 16.04 and Alpine 3.13, respectively.
```

### .NET Y2038 support

> .NET 8 already [supports](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/pull/51099) 64-bit time on musl Linux, and on architectures other than arm. This just leaves the glibc-based arm32 Linux build.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.NET 8 already [supports](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/pull/51099) 64-bit time on musl Linux, and on architectures other than 32-bit arm. This just leaves the glibc-based arm32 Linux build.
```

> # Y2038 support in .NET 9 linux arm32

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Y2038 support in .NET 9 Linux arm32
```
Linux is a name of a thing. Start with upper case? (multiple places)

> In .NET 9, we addressed the Y2038 problem for linux arm32. mattheweshleman [noticed](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/96460) the issue early in the release cycle, and we also [hit](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/101444) this when our linux arm32 builds started hitting openssl-related errors on Ubuntu 24.04, the first Ubuntu version to enable 64-bit `time_t` by default for linux arm32. This document describes our approach to Y2038 support.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In .NET 9, we addressed the Y2038 problem for linux arm32. @mattheweshleman [noticed](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/96460) the issue early in the release cycle, and we also [hit](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/101444) this when our linux arm32 builds started hitting openssl-related errors on Ubuntu 24.04, the first Ubuntu version to enable 64-bit `time_t` by default for linux arm32. This document describes our approach to Y2038 support.
```

### Summary

> Our default posture when facing ABI breaks in the Linux ecosystem is to first align with the latest distributions, and then work backwards to determine a reasonable compatibility story for older distributions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Our default posture for latest .NET is to align with the latest Linux distributions first, and then work backwards to determine a reasonable compatibility story for older distributions.
```
This is not limited to ABI breaks

Normally, ABI breeaks like this are not a problem for the Linux ecosystem because distributions rebuild all packages using the new ABI. However, the Microsoft distribution of .NET is somewhat unique in that it provides one set of binaries that are compatible with a broad range of distros (as long as the architecture and libc flavor match). This is similar to Python's [manylinux](https://github.com/pypa/manylinux) wheels.

[Ubuntu](https://discourse.ubuntu.com/t/ubuntu-24-04-lts-noble-numbat-release-notes/39890#year-2038-support-for-the-armhf-architecture-5) made this change in 24.04, and [Debian](https://wiki.debian.org/ReleaseGoals/64bit-time) 13 is planned to be the first Debian release with 64-bit time.

[musl](https://musl.libc.org/time64.html) version 1.2.0 got 64-bit time_t support, which was adopted in [Alpine](https://wiki.alpinelinux.org/wiki/Release_Notes_for_Alpine_3.13.0) 3.13.

### .NET builds

> .NET official builds are produced by building the product on a dedicated set of build images. The images run Azure Linux 3.0 with a modern cross-compilation toolchain, and also include a root filesystem of an old linux distribution that provides an old version of glibc (or musl libc), which determines the libc compatibility of our builds.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.NET official builds are produced by building the product on a dedicated set of build images. The images run Azure Linux 3.0 with an up-to-date cross-compilation toolchain, and also include a root filesystem of an old linux distribution that provides an old version of glibc (or musl libc), which determines the libc compatibility of our builds.
```
I would not describe the toolchain as modern.

In .NET 8, we [support](https://github.com/dotnet/core/blob/main/release-notes/8.0/supported-os.md#libc-compatibility) glibc 2.23 andc musl 1.2.2, by building the product with a root filesystem from Ubuntu 16.04 and Alpine 3.13, respectively.

### .NET Y2038 support

.NET 8 already [supports](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/pull/51099) 64-bit time on musl linux, and on architectures other than arm. This just leaves the glibc-based arm32 linux build.

#### glibc

Because our build already [defined](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/pull/100461) `_TIME_BITS=64`, the main change we had to make was to [update](https://github.com/dotnet/dotnet-buildtools-prereqs-docker/pull/1037) the Ubuntu version of our rootfs to one that had a glibc with `_TIME_BITS` support. By targeting Ubuntu 22.04, .NET would be built with 64-bit `time_t`, allowing `DateTime.UtcNow` to [work](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/96460) correctly past Y2038.

With this change, glibc-based .NET 9 (on linux arm) is only [supported](https://github.com/dotnet/core/blob/main/release-notes/9.0/supported-os.md) on distributions with at least glibc 2.35 (from Ubuntu 22.04).

> #### openssl

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### OpenSSL
```
?
